---
title: What Size?
layout: post
tags: design mobile ui
---
My main "nights and weekends" project lately has been a mobile
application I'm calling "Unravled." It's a knitting counter, written
entirely in client-side Javascript, and packaged using PhoneGap as an
Android (and, maybe later, iOS) app.

One of the interesting side-effects of using HTML in a WebView to
render your application is that, by default, Android will
automatically scale all the HTML elements one higher (or lower)
resolution screens. I didn't think much of this until I started
actually testing the app on my Galaxy Nexus, which has a 1.5x scaling
factor.

[Screenshot of scaled app?]

All the text is beautiful and crisp, but the icons are horrible! The
trick to making everything look good is to disable the automatic
scaling, via a `meta` tag, and scale it all yourself. For me, the
first step was to try to scale the application icon, which I had drawn
in Inkscape.

![Unravled Icon in Inkscape](/post_images/unravled_icon_inkscape.png)

The easiest thing to do is just to export the icon in the appropriate
sizes for 1x, 1.5x and 2x scaling (there is also a "low-resolution"
0.75x scaling, but I decided not to support it). One of the keys to
keeping the lines clean and sharp is to align any vertical or
horizontal lines to an even pixel boundary at the exported size, so
that you can keep anti-aliasing on for the curves, but not end up with
any fuzzy gray areas near the sharp edges. That's (relatively) simple
to do when you are only targeting 1x and 2x scaling (but you have half
the pixel boundary positions to work with), but it gets much harder
when you also want to target 1.5x scaling. There are very few pixel
boundaries that are shared between a 32, 48 and 64 pixel wide icon.

I played around with the idea of "hinting" my icon (by automatically
moving the vertexes when exporting it at different sizes), but then I
found FontForge, which is a full-featured, open source font
editor. The nice thing about fonts is that the built-in font renderer
will already handle rendering the font with "hints," and FontForge can
embedded (and even auto-generate) the hints for you. I'll need to save
the details of creating the font for another post, but I was able to
convert my custom icon, plus the icons I was using from an existing
SVG icon set, to a font in an afternoon.

Once I had the icons out of the way, the next problem was the
CSS. When auto-scaling is off, WebKit will automatically multiply any
absolute sizes defined in your CSS by whatever the scaling factor
is. Once you turn it off, you have to manage the different absolute
sizes yourself. Additionally, with scaling on, any CSS media queries
will "lie" and say that the viewport is smaller than it actually is.

The biggest problem here was that I am using Bootstrap, which, while
very cool, specifies a lot of things in absolute pixels (especially
for the grid system), and all of those sizes needed to be
scaled. While playing around with the images, I tried scaling the
navbar using `less` mixins, which worked reasonably well, but required
a lot of typing: every element I wanted to scale had to be
re-calculated in my master CSS, assuming it was defined as a mixin in
the first place, which many elements aren't.

I knew I wanted to implement the scaling at "build time" so that I
could easily add my own custom CSS, or upgrade Bootstrap, without
going through an involved upgrade process. My first thought was to
take advantage of `less` and the fact that I was already recompiling
all the `less` code at each build. When you invoke the `less` compiler
via Javascript, you actually get hooks into the various stages of the
compilation pipeline, so you can get the AST that the parser generates
and operate on it, before compiling it down to CSS. The problem here
is that the AST is entirely undocumented, and probably subject to
change. Additionally, there are different ways that the AST represents
numbers: sometimes as a string value (i.e. `16px`) but sometimes as
the result of a computation. In that case it's a sub-tree representing
the expression, with the leaves being either variable references or
numeric literals, which are JS objects containing an integer value and
a string unit.

In the end, that was all very complicated. Once you get down to the
compiled CSS, you just need to multiply all the values that are
specified in "px" by whatever the scaling factor is. Since Node isn't
very handy for transforming files (the standard library doesn't even
offer a means to read a file line-by-line), I fell back on this simple
Python script:

{% highlight python %}
import sys
import re

pixels = re.compile(r'(\d+)(px|\.png)')

scale = float(sys.argv[3])

with open(sys.argv[1], 'r') as input, open(sys.argv[2], 'w') as output:
    for line in input:
        line = pixels.sub(
            lambda m: '{0}{1}'.format(
                int(int(m.group(1)) * scale), 
                m.group(2)), 
            line)
        
        output.write(line)
{% endhighlight %}

Sometimes the simplest solution is the best! The lambda is a little
messy, and should probably get converted to a named function. It
wouldn't be too bad, except for the need to convert to an int so many
times. Checking for ".png" files was a holdover from using SVGs
rendered at different scales. It lets you specify file names like:
foo32.png in the source (1x scaled) CSS, and have it converted to
foo48.png in the 1.5x CSS file.

Once I had the images and the CSS scaled, I was pretty much done. This
would definitely be a lot trickier if you were specifying any sizes in
your HTML (especially in your HTML templates), but you shouldn't be
doing that, now, should you?


